Paul Vanden Broeck
April, 2016
History 140 Final Paper Assignment
The Historical Accuracy of the Boston Massacre of 1770 in the HBO Series “John Adams”
	Hollywood has always had a track record for muddling with facts when depicting historical events. While historical accuracy is retained in some instances and scenes, most of the truthfulness of these historical representations are very questionable. The HBO series “John Adams” from 2008 is no exception.  Through my research, I’ve found many blatant fabrications throughout the series. The representation of a specific event, The Boston Massacre of 1770, is one such example.
	Before covering historical inaccuracies concerning the Boston Massacre, some background information is needed. The event occurred on the night of Match 5th, 1770 on Kings street, Boston Massachusetts. It involved a deadly confrontation between a crowd of colonists and a squad of British soldiers. The immediate outcome of this event was the death of several colonial citizens. Some of the exact details are difficult to determine due to the hectic and panicked nature of the incident, but the course of events is roughly as follows.
	A young sentry, Private Hugh White (Allison, 11), was at his post when a confrontation between Captain John Goldfinch and Edward Garrick - a wig-makers apprentice - broke out. White interjected into the argument on the side of his superior officer. The confrontation between the boy and Private White escalated to a point where White stuck the boy with his musket. The boy cried out, drawing the attention of more people. As the crowd grew larger and larger, they became more hostile and began taunting White. The crowd was temporarily quelled by Captain Goldfinch recalling most of his troops to within the barracks and stating that no more British soldiers would be brought out that night (Bowen, 350).
	The crowd was quickly riled up again when somebody went up to the bell tower to ring the fire bell.  This attracted attract even more people swelling the crowd to 100 or so. In 18th century Boston, the risk of a house fire was far higher than modern times. Most of the buildings were made of wood, and houses burning down were a weekly occurrence (Bowen, 350). When the bell tower rang, it usually signaled fire to the whole town. In a normal fire, all able bodied males would rush to the scene of the fire with buckets of water and other firefighting equipment.
	Private White, surrounded by the now much larger crowd and still being pelted with ice and rocks, cried for help. Captain John Preston answered White’s call with a small squad of eight soldiers, led by Preston. Preston had given specific orders to his men not to fire upon the crowd. When Preston and his men arrived, they formed a semicircle around White. All the while, the crowd continued to harass the soldiers. The crowd was now daring the soldiers to fire. One solider, Private Hugh Montgomery (Zobel, Boston Massacre, p. 197.) was hit by one of the thrown objects. Upon impact, Montgomery’s weapon slipped from his hands and accidently discharged. The other soldiers, hearing the gunshot, presumably thought that a command to fire was given and that they couldn’t hear it over the noisy crowd. Shortly after Montgomery’s weapon discharged, some of the remaining soldiers fired their weapons.
	With some background knowledge of the event, any discrepancies found in the HBO series can be better appreciated. While there is inevitably some discrepancy between sources on some of the more detailed events, most of the sources are in agreement as to a general outline of the incident. The amount of available documentation on the subject nullifies a possible argument in defense of HBO that there wasn’t enough information to accurately depict the Boston Massacre.
	Just before the event took place, HBO depicts John Adams as resting with his family in his home before he hears the bells. One source (grant, 85) recalls that Adams was not in his home, but with some members of a club he belonged to. The significance of his location relates to when John Adams actually arrived at the scene. The location of the club meeting was in the home of Henderson Inches, which was located in the south end of the city. The Massacre itself occurred on Kings Street, which was in the center of the city. The moment of firing occurred while Adams was on his way to the town center. The HBO series depicts Adams as being only 1 block from the center of town when the first shot rang out.  The only explanation I can think of for this discrepancy is that it would far more dramatic for Adams to arrive on the scene with musket smoke still in the air, rather than running to the scene of the incident and gathering bits and pieced of information from panicking civilians running 
	Another possible mistake I noticed leading up to the actual event was the argument that initially started it. In reality, the catalyst for the mob was an argument between the sentry and a young apprentice. White struck the boy, which initially caused the mob to form. The HBO series, however, depicts the start of the mob as some mischief amongst some young boys taunting and throwing things at the sentry for amusement. No mention or acknowledgement of the argument was made. While it could be that the boys shown were the beginnings of the mob just after White had struck Garrick, there is little evidence to back it up. Rather than engaged in a fight, as White would most likely have been, he was shown as standing at his post and minding his own business. Furthermore, there is no mention of Captain Goldfinch, the officer who was initially involved in the altercation. Turning attention back to the boys shown in the HBO series, they appeared to be no more than 12-13. The historical sources state that an apprentice was involved in the argument. While it is true that apprentice ships commonly did start at that age, I don’t think it’s likely that a single 13-year-old would take on an armed soldier. I think it was more likely that the actual age of the apprentice was closer to 15-17 years. Unfortunately, I couldn’t find information about the actual age of Edward Garrick.
	One of the more obvious mistakes I noticed in the HBO series was the identity of the Sentry. As stated before in the overview of the event, the sentry was Private Hugh White. In the HBO series, however, the credits mention the sentry as being Private Hugh Montgomery. Montgomery was in fact one of the soldiers that came to the aid of the real sentry. To say that this mistake was caused by mere confusion due to both soldiers being named Hugh is not really a valid argument. All sources I’ve found clearly point to White as the sentry. While the HBO series does correctly identify the soldier who was struck and fired first as Hugh Montgomery, the fact that they portray him and the sentry as the same person may paint an unfair picture of the sentry. Most evidence points to a blow to the head as the initial cause for the first gunshot, it could be argued that it was out of self-defense. To fire out of self-defense puts some of the blame upon the soldier, whereas a blow to the head places most of the blame upon the rioting citizens. 
	Yet another inaccuracy can be seen – or rather heard – in the fatal moment of the shooting. Regardless of the cause of the initial firing, many first-hand accounts recall that the remaining soldiers fired in a rather clumsy, confused, and unorganized fashion. Many accounts state that only a few of the soldiers even fired their weapons. What most likely happened is that the remaining soldiers fired out of confusion. Between the noises of the shouting crowd, the incoming chunks of ice, rock and other stuff, and the inimical gunshot going off could easily cause a false assumption that the soldiers were meant to fire. The HBO series, on the other hand, represents the fatal moment with John Adams rushing to the scene when a single shot goes off, followed by a person crying in pain. Just after the first shot, an unknown voice can clearly be heard shouting “fire!” and is followed by all eight remaining soldiers firing their weapons at once, as though they had been given the order to fire. This misrepresentation could imply that Captain Preston may have indeed given the order to fire. The reality of the situation was that Preston was well aware that if he were to give the order to fire, it would most likely spelled imprisonment or even a hanging for him. 
	While not a specific error or misinterpretation, the HBO series left out some important background information on the setting for the Boston Massacre. On February 27th, 1770 a funeral was being held for a recently killed 12-year-old boy (Bowen. 347). Not long before the 27th, a merchant’s store had a sign hung on it, stating that it was in violation of the non-importation laws that prohibited the colonist from buying goods from anyone but British merchants. The next door neighbor of the merchant was Mr. Ebenezer Richardson – a man known in the Boston community to be a customs informer. He was found trying to tear down the sign, when a crowd of people converged upon him. As a customs informer (a tattle tale for all intents and purposes), he was very much disliked within the community. In self-defense, he grabbed his musket and fired into the crowd, shouting “by god, I’ll make a lane through you!” (Bowen, 347). The musket ball struck and kills a 12 year old boy, whose funeral was held on February 27th. 
	The significance of the boy’s death set the mood of the city. The citizens were angry in the days following the boy’s death, and they were looking for a fight. Much of their anger was directed towards the British, since they saw them as being as least indirectly at fault for the death of an innocent child. In addition to the anger over the death of the boy, the Bostonians were upset in general over the unfair taxation laws imposed upon them by the British government. Leaving out this background information might make the crowd appear to have formed out of nowhere and make the British soldiers who were caught up in the incident on march 5th to simply have been the victims on an unruly mob. the mob’s restlessness is understandable, even if it was an overreaction.  
Just as the omission of the February 27th incident caused a misrepresentation on the part of the Bostonians, the omission and outright falsehoods of the HBO depiction of the night of the Boston massacre also result in misunderstandings. While the high production value of the series may give it an air of authority and accuracy, it is important to remember that Hollywood has never had a good reputation for accuracy. In HBO’s defense, their John Adams series does give a good overview of the major points in the man’s life, but it’s accuracy in general, much like that of the case of the Boston massacre, leaves much to be desired.
 
Works Cited
Allison, Robert J. The Boston Massacre. Beverly, MA: Commonwealth Editions, 2006. Print.
Bowen, Catherine Drinker. John Adams and the American Revolution. Boston: Little, Brown, 1950. Print.
Grant, James. John Adams: Party of One. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2005. Print.
Preston, John. "Captain Preston's Account of the Boston Massacre March 5 1770." American History: From Revolution To Reconstruction and beyond. University of Groningen, The Netherlands, Aug. 2012. Web. 13 Apr. 2016. <http://www.let.rug.nl/usa/documents/1751-1775/captain-prestons-account-of-the-boston-massacre-march-5-1770.php>.
Smith, Page. John Adams. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1962. Print.
Zobel, Hiller B. The Boston Massacre. New York: W.W. Norton, 1970. Print.


MLA formatting by BibMe.org.
